---
layout: post
title: "AES: A simple illustration of how the most popular encryption in the world *actually* works"
date: 2022-02-13
mathjax: true
---

Ever wondered how the most popular form of encryption in the world
*actually* works? Most security professionals don't know, probably because knowing
the internals doesn't actually come up all that often: all they need to know is that
it works. It's called AES, which stands for the Advanced Encryption Standard.
AES is ubiquitous; Chances are, AES is being used right now to secure the these words you're reading. AES is probably used to secure the vast majority of websites you visit, as well as your personal data you share with them. Companies use it. Governments use it. Billions of people use it every day without even knowing.

Rather than pontificate in an elongated blog post or share a splatter of code to decipher, I'll just share the most elegant, simple illustration I've ever seen. If a picture is worth 1,000 words then a flash animation must be worth even more.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/gP4PqVGudtg" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

A natural question to ask is: "how do we know its secure?". Indeed, how do we know any cryptosystem in general is secure? What *exactly* do we even mean by "secure"? AES certainly looks like
it mixes up the key with the plaintext pretty well. But History buffs will
note the Wehrmacht were pretty confident in the Engima because it was
complicated and nobody had broken it. But Alan Turning (with the
help of the Polish) did, much to their chagrin. That's actually a very deep question, and the theme is something [my PhD](https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:389973d5-9c96-4905-b412-2514578abf20/download_file?file_format=pdf&safe_filename=DPhil%2BThesis.pdf&type_of_work=Thesis) tried to address. It is something I may address in a later post.
